Visualization matplotlib (#2)
carpentries-incubator/python-ecology-lesson: episodes/visualizing-matplotlib.md

It supports a wide range of raster and vector graphics formats including PNG, PostScript, EPS, PDF and SVG.

Moreover, matplotlib is the actual engine behind the plotting capabilities of Pandas, and other plotting libraries like seaborn and plotnine.
For example, when we call the `.plot()` methods on Pandas data objects, matplotlib is actually being used in the backstage.

The first thing matplotlib suggests us to do is create our figure and our axes (or plots), using the `plt.subplots()` function.

```python
fig, axis = plt.subplots()
```

The `fig` object we are creating is the entire plot area, which can contain one or multiple axes.
In this case, the function default is to create only one set of axes, which will be referenced as the `axis` object.
For now, this results in an empty plot, but we'll start working on our box plot to make it look nicer.

We'll add the previous scatter plot we made to this `axis`, by using the `ax` argument inside the `.plot()` function.
This gives us a plot just as we had it before, which we will start customizing.

> 

Reviewer: I think we need another sentence here to explain that we are switching over to the box plot example again now. Or could we have used the box plot all along? Do we need to start with the scatter as above?

```python
fig, axis = plt.subplots()
complete_old.plot(column = "hindfoot_length", by = "plot_type",
                  kind = "box", ax = axis)
```

To start, we can rotate the x-axis labels 90 degrees to make them readable.
For this, we use the `.tick_params()` method on the `axis` object.

```python
fig, axis = plt.subplots()
complete_old.plot(column = "hindfoot_length", by = "plot_type",
                  kind = "box", ax = axis)
axis.tick_params(axis = 'x', rotation = 90)
```

> Furthermore, we can modify the title (the column name is the default) and add the x- and y-axis labels with the `.set_title()`, `.set_xlabel()`, and `.set_ylabel()` methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Axis objects have a lot of methods like `.tick_params()`, which can be used to adjust the layout and styling of the plot.
For example, we can modify the title (the column name is the default) and add the x- and y-axis labels with the `.set_title()`, `.set_xlabel()`, and `.set_ylabel()` methods.
```

> By now, you may have saved typing time and start copying and pasting the parts of the code that don't change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By now, you may have begun copying and pasting the parts of the code that don't change to save yourself some typing time.
Some lines might only include subtle changes so take care not to miss anything small and important when reusing lines written previously.
```

```python
fig, axis = plt.subplots()
complete_old.plot(column = "hindfoot_length", by = "plot_type",
                  kind = "box", ax = axis)
axis.tick_params(axis='x', rotation = 90)
axis.set_title("Distribution of hindfoot lenght across plot types")
axis.set_xlabel("Plot Types")
axis.set_ylabel("Hindfoot Length (mm)")
```

### Making multiple subplots

> If we want more than one plot in the same figure, we could specify the number of rows (`nrows` argument) and the number of columns (`ncols`) in this function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we want more than one plot in the same figure, we could specify the number of rows (`nrows` argument) and the number of columns (`ncols`) when calling the `plt.subplots` function.
```

For example, let's say we want two plots (or axes), organized in two columns and one row.

> This will be useful in a minute, when we add in the same figure our scatter and our box plots.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will be useful in a minute, when we arrange our scatter plot and box plot in a single figure.
```

```python
fig, axes = plt.subplots(nrows = 1, ncols = 2)
```

> To increase the level of complexity and show the capabilities of Matplotlib, let's get two subplots into the figure.
> We'll use two columns and one row, so we'll use `fig, axes = plt.subplots(nrows = 1, ncols = 2)`.

Reviewer: This feels like a duplication of the above. I think it can be safely removed.

```suggestion
```

| ----------------- | -----------------------------               |
| record\_id        | Unique id for the observation               |
| month             | month of observation                        |
| day               | day of observation                          | 
| year              | year of observation                         | 
| plot\_id          | ID of a particular site                     | 
| species\_id       | 2-letter code                               | 
| sex               | sex of animal ("M", "F")                    | 
| hindfoot\_length  | length of the hindfoot in mm                | 
| weight            | weight of the animal in grams               | 
| genus             | the genus of the species                    |
| species           | the latin species name                      |
| taxa              | general taxonomic category                  |
| plot_type         | type of experimental manipulation conducted |

We'll load the data in the csv into Python and name this new object `complete_old`.
For this, we can use the `pandas` library and its `.read_csv()` function, like shown here:

```python

> complete_old = pd.read_csv("surveys_complete_77_89.csv")

Reviewer 2: It may be a good idea to use "data/raw/surveys_complete_77_89.csv" instead and have folks use the directories from the first lesson since in that lesson (if we use the same strategy as the R lesson) we are discussing using a file structure like the following:

```
Python-Ecology-Workshop
│
└── scripts
│
└── data
│    └── cleaned
│    └── raw
│
└─── images
│
└─── documents
```

Author: Yes, I really like this, and this is how I personally like to organize the workshops I teach (although it can lead to confusion and errors related to relative paths if learners don't follow the exact same structure -i.e. they use uppercase Data- or if they don't create the jupyter notebook inside `scripts`.
In the case we want learners to save the notebook inside `scripts`, then the code should be
`complete_old = pd.read_csv("../data/raw/surveys_complete_77_89.csv")`
and that's where it also gets a tad complicated to explain the `..` and relative paths. This is what I do in workshops, but it takes around 10-15 minutes to solve relative paths issues

Author: Ok, I just updated that line of code and added the Instructor Note. Marking this as resolved.

```python
fig, axes = plt.subplots(nrows = 1, ncols = 2)
complete_old.plot(x = "weight", y = "hindfoot_length", kind="scatter", alpha = 0.2, ax = axes[0])
axes[0].set_title("Weight vs. Hindfoot Length")
axes[0].set_xlabel("Weight (g)")
axes[0].set_ylabel("Hindfoot Length (mm)")

complete_old.plot(column = "hindfoot_length", by = "plot_type",
                  kind = "box", ax = axes[1])
axes[1].tick_params(axis = "x", rotation = 90)
axes[1].set_title("Hindfoot Length by Plot Type")
axes[1].set_xlabel("Plot Types")
axes[1].set_ylabel("Hindfoot Length (mm)")

fig.suptitle("Analysis of Hindfoot Length variable", fontsize=16)
fig.tight_layout()
```

You now have the basic tools to create and customize plots using pandas and Matplotlib!
Let's put it into practice.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  challenge

## Challenge - Changing figure size

Our plot probably needs more vertical space, so let's change the figure size. Take a look at [Matplotlib's figure documentation](https://matplotlib.org/stable/api/_as_gen/matplotlib.pyplot.figure.html) and answer:

1. What is the argument we need to make this adjustment?

> 1. What is the default figure size if we don't change the argument?

Reviewer 2: Minor typo. This numbered list includes all "1."
